Let’s recap some of the important concepts
from this lecture.
Firstly, there are some very important conventions.
First is the so called right-handed coordinate
frame. When we construct a 3-dimensional coordinate
frame, we need to construct it properly and
we use our right hand to guide us. The x-axis
is aligned with our thumb, the y-axis is aligned
with our index finger and the z-axis with
our middle finger. When it comes to describing
the direction of rotation around an axis,
we imagine that we’re grasping that axis
with our thumb pointing in the direction of
the arrow and the direction that our fingers
curl around the axis indicate the positive
rotational direction.
A rotation matrix in three dimensions can
be described by a 3 x 3 matrix and the columns
of that matrix are unit vectors that are aligned
with the axes of coordinate frame B. The first
column is the x-axis of frame B, second column
is the y-axis of frame B and the third column
is the z-axis of frame B. And, we use this
rotation matrix to rotate a vector from frame
B to frame A.
There are three elementary rotation matrices
which correspond to rotation around the x-axis,
the y-axis and the z-axis. We can create an
arbitrary rotation between any two coordinate
frames by using a sequence of these elementary
rotations. There are in fact 12 possible rotation
sequences. An important caveat, part of Euler
rotation theorem, is that no two consecutive
rotations can be about the same axis. Of this
12, 6 of these sequences are referred to as
Euler angles. They contain two rotations about
the same axis, but not sequentially. For example,
rotate about x, then, y, then x again. Although
all six of these technically are Euler angles,
when the term Euler angles is used, people
are generally referring to the specific sequence,
ZYZ. But, this convention varies across different
disciplines of engineering. So, it’s important
to be sure when you’re talking to somebody
about Euler angles that you’re talking about
exactly the same sequence.
The other six are referred to as Cardan angles.
And, two of these specifically are often referred
to as roll, pitch, yaw angles. The Cardan
angles have rotations about three different axes.
We can describe the rotation from any one
frame to another in terms of a single rotation,
a rotation by an angle Theta about some axis
V. And, we’ve discussed techniques to determine
Theta and V given a rotation matrix. And,
we introduced the Rodriguez equation which
allows us to go from an axis and an angle
back to a rotation matrix.
We introduced quaternions. These are hypercomplex
numbers. They actually comprise a scalar and
a three-element vector. A unit magnitude quaternion
which is referred to as a unit quaternion
can be used to encode rotation. And, there
are some simple rules to determine the inverse
of a quaternion and to compound two quaternions,
and we can work out the effect of two consecutive
rotations.
An important question that comes up a lot
is why do we use something like a rotation
matrix. A rotation matrix is a 3 by 3 matrix
and it contains nine numbers, but we know
from Euler’s theorem that we only need three
numbers - three angles - to describe a rotation.
What’s the advantage of using nine numbers
when I could just use three?
Well, importantly, the rotation matrix is
not just any old 3 by 3 matrix. It is a specific
matrix. It is an orthonormal matrix. So, although
there are nine elements, there are a number
of constraints. In fact there are six constraints,
which leaves us with only 3 degrees of freedom.
The first constraints are that each column
in this matrix is a unit vector. In fact,
that each column is a unit vector introduces
three constraints. And then, the columns are
all orthogonal to one another and that introduces
another three constraints.
The rotation matrix has some very convenient
properties. Firstly, we can compound poses
or rotations simply by multiplication. That’s
not the case for Euler angles or roll, pitch,
yaw angles.
A second really important benefit is that
the columns of a rotation matrix describe
the x, y and z axes of the new coordinate
frame in terms of the old one. Another important
property is that you can actually read a rotation
matrix. The columns of the rotation matrix
describe in terms of unit vectors the x,y
and z-axis of the new coordinate frame.
Let’s have a look at a few of the different
rotational representations that we’ve discussed.
We can have a rotation matrix with its nine
numbers in it. And, one of the advantages
of rotation matrix is that there is no possibility
of having a singularity. We talked about singularities,
the gimbal problem, and that occurs with
Euler angles or roll, pitch, yaw representation
of orientation.
Compounding two rotations is easy. For a rotation
matrix, we simply multiply the two matrices
together, whereas for the three-angle representations,
it’s nontrivial. We can also consider that
we can represent a coordinate frame’s orientation
by two vectors; an approach vector and an
orientation vector. That’s just six numbers.
It’s singularity free but not very easy
to compound two orientations expressed in this
form. We can also consider the angle + axis
orientation. We have one number to describe
the amount of rotation, the angle, and we
need two more numbers to represent the rotational
axis. It’s a unit vector in three dimensions,
so there are only two unique numbers in it.
This representation is singularity free, but
it’s a bit problematic to represent a zero
rotation. And, once again, compounding two
rotations is nontrivial. Final representation
is the unit quaternion. It’s got four numbers,
though only three of them are unique because
it’s got a unit magnitude. It’s singularity
free. And, we introduced the Hamiltonian product
as a way of multiplying two quaternions. So,
in some respect, the quaternion has got a
lot of advantages, singularity free, represented
by a fewer numbers, and two quaternions can
be multiplied together using fewer arithmetic
operation than is the case for matrix
multiplication. In robotics, it’s really
the top and bottom representation that are
in common use, the rotation matrix and the
unit quaternion.
Finally, we can represent pose, which has
got both translational component and a rotational
component, by a single homogeneous transformation
matrix - a 4 x 4 matrix. Composition of relative
poses is done by multiplying matrices. Negation
or an inverse relative pose is done by inverting
the matrix. Remember that inverting a homogeneous
transformation matrix is not computed by taking
its transpose. That’s a property only of
a rotation matrix. And, transforming a point
represented by a vector from one frame to
another is done by multiplying homogeneous
representation of the point by a homogeneous
transformation matrix.
Final thing to remember, coordinate frames
are your friend. Use lots of them when you’re
trying to describe a complex problem. Attach
them to every object of interest and write
them the relationships between the coordinate
frames. Some of the relationships might be
constant. Some of those relationships might
be time varying. And, remember, NASA uses
them. They must be good.